Section 2 December edits (#163)
hassanobeid1994/tr_b_causal_2020: article/sections/_2_graph_importance.tex

\section{Perils of disregard}
\label{sec:graph-importance}

As stated in Section \ref{sec:intro}, the development of transportation demand models aims to evaluate the impact of policies on a certain
transportation demand related outcome. As an example, consider the proposals from the following fictitious scenarios:
\begin{itemize}
 \item Based on input from the public, the Department of Transportation (DOT) of  is considering implementing a new parking policy.

>  This proposed policy would put in place pricing changes and parking restrictions that would discourage individuals from parking in the central business district.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 This proposed policy would change prices and restrict parking to discourage individuals from parking in the central business district.
```

>  The DOT (and its constituents) believes that this policy would encourage people to use more active transportation modes (e.g: walking, biking, etc..).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The DOT and its constituents believe that this policy would encourage people to use more active transportation modes (e.g., walking, biking, etc.).
```

As a result, these proposals maintain an obscure representation of how the policy or project will achieve their desired goals.

DAGs allow one to clearly encode their assumptions about the data generating process and the problem at hand.

> Researchers and practitioners have made use of DAGs in fields ranging from medicine and epidemiology (\citet{shrier_2008_reducing}, \citet{sung_2012_reducing}) to economics (\citet{white_2011_covariate}) and have found them to be practical.

Reviewer: @bouzaghrane 1 nitpick:
```suggestion
Researchers and practitioners have made use of DAGs in fields ranging from medicine and epidemiology (\citet{shrier_2008_reducing, sung_2012_reducing}) to economics (\citet{white_2011_covariate}) and have found them to be practical.
```

    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{cross\_bay}} \times \textrm{Cross\_Bay} + \beta_{\textrm{hh\_size}} \times \textrm{HH\_Size} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{n\_kids\_hh}} \times \textrm{Number\_of\_kids} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Walk-Transit-Walk}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{WTW}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_time\_transit}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_cost}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Cost} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Drive-Transit-Walk}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{DTW}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_time\_transit}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_cost}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Cost} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Walk-Tranist-Drive}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{WTD}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_time\_transit}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_cost}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Cost} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Bike}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{Bike}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_distance\_bike}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Distance} \\

> \textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Walk}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{Walk}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_distance\_walk}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Distance} \\

Reviewer: Try this instead, it'll fix the compilation issues (I think the error was in line 69. There should be a backslash in front of the underscore in front of alone).

```suggestion
\begin{equation*}
\begin{aligned}
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Drive Alone}\right) &= \beta_{\textrm{travel\_time}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} + \beta_{\textrm{cost\_per\_distance\_drive\_alone}} \times \textrm{Cost\_per\_Distance}\left(\textrm{da}\right) \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{autos}} \times \textrm{Number\_of\_Autos} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Shared Ride 2}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{shared\_ride\_2}} + \beta_{\textrm{time\_drive}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{cost\_per\_distance\_shared\_ride\_2}} \times \textrm{Cost\_per\_Distance}_{ \textrm{sr2} } + \beta_{\textrm{autos}}  \times \textrm{Number\_of\_Autos} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{cross\_bay}} \times \textrm{Cross\_Bay} + \beta_{\textrm{hh\_size}} \times \textrm{HH\_Size} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{n\_kids\_hh}} \times \textrm{Number\_of\_kids} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Shared Ride 3+}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{sr3+}} + \beta_{\textrm{time\_drive}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{cost\_per\_distance\_sr3+}} \times \textrm{Cost\_per\_Distance}_{\textrm{sr3+}} + \beta_{\textrm{autos}}  \times \textrm{Number\_of\_Autos} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{cross\_bay}} \times \textrm{Cross\_Bay} + \beta_{\textrm{hh\_size}} \times \textrm{HH\_Size} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{n\_kids\_hh}} \times \textrm{Number\_of\_kids} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Walk-Transit-Walk}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{WTW}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_time\_transit}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_cost}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Cost} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Drive-Transit-Walk}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{DTW}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_time\_transit}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_cost}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Cost} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Walk-Tranist-Drive}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{WTD}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_time\_transit}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Time} \\
    &\quad + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_cost}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Cost} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Bike}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{Bike}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_distance\_bike}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Distance} \\
\textrm{Utility} \left(\textrm{Walk}\right) &= ASC_{\textrm{Walk}} + \beta_{\textrm{travel\_distance\_walk}} \times \textrm{Travel\_Distance} \\
\end{aligned}
\end{equation*}
```

Reviewer: Also, can you spell out household instead of using HH?

For our purposes, we focus on car-centric modes (Drive alone, Shared ride with another person,
and a shared ride with two or more individuals).
We compute the difference in mode choice probabilities from different models based on the two constructed DAGs.

> Readers interested in exploring the details of our simulation exercise can refer to the GitHub repository \citep{brathwaite_etal_2020}.

Reviewer: Love it.
```suggestion
Readers interested in exploring the details of our simulation exercise can refer to our GitHub repository \citep{brathwaite_etal_2020}.
```

We then plot histograms of the computed differences between the average probability of an individual
in our sample choosing a car centric mode before and after implementing a policy or intervention
aimed at reducing travel distance.

> These differences are plotted under the following assumptions that the outcome model is the same in both scenarios and the only difference between the two scenarios is the set of variables affected by the proposed intervention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These differences are plotted under the following assumptions: that the outcome model is the same in both scenarios and that the only difference between the two scenarios is the set of variables affected by the proposed intervention.
```

> This difference in the set of variables affected by the proposed intervention is a result of the two different causal graphs representing each scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This difference in the set of variables affected by the proposed intervention is a result of the two different causal graphs representing each scenario (Figures \ref{fig:IND_GRAPH} and \ref{fig:DA_causal_2}).
```

Reviewer: I would also add the following, follow-up sentence before the sentence with the histogram on line 201:
>Alternatively, the differing affected variables can be seen as the result of using two different treatment effect estimators with the graph in Figure \ref{fig:DA_causal_2}: a total effect estimator and a natural direct effect estimator \citep{pearl_2012_causal}.

> Figure \ref{fig:histogram_probability} highlights the bias between the estimated probability of an average individual choosing a car centric mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Figure \ref{fig:histogram_probability} highlights the resulting bias between the estimated probability of an average individual choosing a car centric mode.
```

This plotted difference shows the importance of using causal graphs in the estimation of treatment effects.

> This fact does not and should not take away from the importance of correctly specified outcome choice models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, the importance of a correct causal graph does not and should not take away from the importance of correctly specified outcome choice models.
```

\begin{figure}[h!]
   \centering
   \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{histogram_selection_on_obs.png}
   \caption{Histograms of the probability of choosing Car Centric Modes under Different Data Generating processes.}
   \label{fig:histogram_probability}
\end{figure}

> We have shown in this simulation exercise how causal graphs can be helpful in avoiding biased causal effect inferences of proposed treatments or policies.

Reviewer: All causal inferences are relative to a particular treatment.
```suggestion
We have shown in this simulation exercise how causal graphs can be helpful in avoiding biased causal effect inferences.
```

> Specifically, two situations highlight this fact; having mediating or confounding variables relative to the variable the proposed treatment intervenes on in our outcome model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, two situations highlight this fact; having mediating or confounding variables relative to the variable being intervened on in our outcome model.
```

> In the case of mediating variables relative to the node the treatment intervenes on, we need to be careful about constructing our treatment effect estimator and make sure we have a total effect estimator instead of a natural direct effect estimator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of mediating variables relative to the node the treatment intervenes on, we need to be careful about constructing our treatment effect estimator.
In particular, we need to ensure that we appropriately use total effect estimators instead of natural direct effect estimators.
```

Enacting a certain treatment shows its effect through the mediating variable.
Therefore, when ``changing'' the value of the intervention node, we need to make sure the values and distributions of any downstream nodes reflect this change.

> For more information on the mediating mechanism, please refer to work by \citet{pearl_2012}.

Reviewer: If you don't feel strongly about it, please change the citation to `\citet{pearl_2012_causal}` and adjust the bibliography.
```suggestion
For more information on mediating mechanisms, please refer to work by \citet{pearl_2012} and references therein.
```

> In the case of confounding variables, it is important to consider the treatment assignment mechanism when building choice models.

Reviewer: Also, could we make the following change?
```suggestion
In the case of confounding variables, we need to consider the treatment assignment mechanism when building choice models.
```

> As \citep{hahn2020} show, a way for considering the treatment assignment mechanism is to estimate the propensity score of our sample and adjust for that in our outcome model.

Reviewer: Hmm my point in mentioning `hahn2020` isn't to bring up their propensity score methods for considering treatment assigment. My intention is to underscore the importance of accounting for the treatment assignment mechanism in general. Hahn et al (2020) provides many simulations that reinforce / point-to this importance.

Reviewer: Also, can you make the following change
```suggestion
As \citep{hahn2020} show, one way to account for the treatment assignment mechanism is to estimate the propensity score in our sample and adjust for that in our outcome model.
```
